La llanura costera de Israel (en, Mishor HaHof) es el estrecha llanura costera a lo largo de la costa del mar Mediterráneo, que alberga al 70% de la población del país.
La llanura se extiende 187 kilómetros de norte a sur y está dividido en una serie de áreas: la llanura de Zabulón (al norte de Haifa), Hof Hacarmel (de Haifa hasta el Monte Carmelo), la llanura del Sharon (del Monte Carmelo a Tel Aviv), y la llanura de Judea (de Tel Aviv a Zikim).
Por su duración, la llanura tiene playas de arena y clima Mediterráneo.
El área fue históricamente fértil en los tiempos bíblicos, siendo algunos sectores continuamente explotado desde entonces, aunque la mayor parte de ellos resultó mucho más tiempo bajo pantanos, teniendo que ser reconvertido de nuevo en fértil por los pioneros sionistas.
En la actualidad, el área es el centro de explotación de cítricos del país, y contiene algunos de los asentamientos agrícolas de mayor éxito del país.
La llanura tiene dos tipos espesos de suelo por causa de los sedimentos de los ríos; uno oscuro y pesado - ideal para realizar cultivos de campo, y otro más delgado y arenoso - ideal para el cultivo de cítricos.
A pesar de su longitud, la llanura solo es atravesada por dos importantes ríos, el Yarkon, que es de 27 kilómetros de largo que fluye desde la zona de Petaj Tikva hacia el Mediterráneo, y el Kishon que es de 43 kilómetros de largo, y desemboca en el golfo de Acre, al norte de Haifa.
Aproximadamente el 70% de la población israelí vive en la llanura costera, la mayor parte de ellos en el área metropolitana de Tel Aviv y el área metropolitana de la Bahía de Haifa.
Es predominantemente habitada por la población judía del país, ya que judíos y otros no árabes constituyen más del 96% de la población de esta región, (alrededor de 4,2 millones de judíos israelíes viven en esta región, alrededor de un tercio de la población judía mundial).
<!--
About 70% of Israel's population lives in the coastal plain, much of them in the Tel Aviv metropolitan area (Gush Dan) and Haifa Bay metropolitan area.
It is the most predominantly Jewish part of the country, as Jews and other non-Arabs make up over 96% of the population in this region, (about 4.2 million Israeli Jews live in this region, 72% of the nations, and about a third of the world's Jewish population.
The Israeli Coastal Plain has been populated for thousands of years, with references to it in Biblical literature.
Recent research however, has concluded that the Coastal Plain was inhabited 5,500 years ago during the Bronze Age.
It is thought that at this time, shifting settlement patterns in the land were caused by climate change which led to flooding of the area which had been a populated commercial and settlement center, and the creation of many swamps.
Settlements are thought to have been spread across the plain, from Gaza up to the Galilee, with the land being an important trade route for the Egyptians.
The coastal plain includes the following geographical regions (from north to south):
The Western Galilee (also known as North coast or Plain of Zebulun) region of the Coastal Plain stretches from Rosh HaNikra in the far North, down to Israel's third-largest city, Haifa.
It is a fertile region containing the city of Nahariya and many moshavim and kibbutzim.
The coast here has many small islands off of it.
Often regarded as a separate region is the Acre coastal plain, which is crowded with urban areas including Acre and the northern Krayot suburbs of Haifa as well as more agricultural areas.
The Hof HaCarmel (Carmel) region covers the area from Haifa down to the town of Zikhron Ya'aqov, the coast nearby Mount Carmel.
The soil of the Hof HaCarmel plain is rich and apart from the main city of Haifa in the north, most settlement here is made up of farming communities.
The Sharon plain is the next stage down the Coastal Plain, running from Zikhron Ya'aqov to Tel Aviv's Yarkon River.
This area is Israel's most densely populated, containing a number of large towns and cities including Netanya and Herzliya as well as smaller communities inland.
Running from Northern Tel Aviv's Yarkon River to Nakhal Shikma, the Central Coastal Plain contains cities such as Bat Yam and Rishon LeZion, and agricultural communities.
Also known as the Shephelah, Plain of Judea, and Western Negev, the Southern Coastal Plain extends south to the Gaza Strip and is divided into two:
-->